                           DESIGNED MIND 2017
                            CALL FOR PAPERS
                   Symposium on the Function, Evolution
                    & Implementation of Consciousness

                Informatics Forum, University of Edinburgh
                           Edinburgh, Scotland
                            8-9 November 2017
                         http://designedmind.org

KEYNOTE SPEAKERS

* Daniel C. Dennett, Tufts University
* Michael Graziano, Princeton University

REPRESENTING OURSELVES

Consciousness is often held to be so mysterious that a theory of it will
require a new kind of science, perhaps one which posits consciousness as an
all-pervasive feature of the universe. We may have to content ourselves with
identifying consciousness with some kind of general-purpose
information-processing or informational complexity, with no real insight into
why such an identification makes sense, or accept consciousness as an emergent
epiphenomenon, something that comes along for the ride whenever information is
processed in complex ways. These relegate consciousness to a rather passive
role, with little to do except come along for the ride.

This is a powerful intuition, but neglects the distinct role that
consciousness plays in our behaviour. Human beings have a rich set of
consciousness-related capabilities: they can describe the world from a vantage
point, contrast how things seem from that vantage point with how they believe
the world to be, summarise their goals and plans, explain the world around
them in terms of possibilities for action, and justify the actions they take
in terms of consciously held beliefs, desires and feelings. Rather than
arising as a mysterious side-effect of information processing, such
“consciousness-talk” - elaborate behaviour oriented around an ostensibly
private mental life - is a collection of specific psychological mechanisms.

It is these behaviours that are the proper target, or explanandum, of a
science of consciousness. What we intuit as a "private realm" is a functional
mechanism operating in the public world: a brain's behavioural interface to
the environment, designed by evolution to enable new levels of autonomy,
self-monitoring and deliberative action. By representing not only the world
and its affordances for action, but also ourselves as embodied agents in the
world, and ultimately ourselves as representers, the evolving brain converged
on the self as the solution to a control problem. We cannot easily appreciate
the world-model as a model, because "we" only exist in virtue of the model, as
its central feature.

The symposium is a forum to elaborate, discuss and critique this emerging
scientific picture of consciousness as a form of reflective behaviour. We
invite perspectives from philosophy, psychology, neuroscience and informatics.
