                           DESIGNED MIND 2017
                   Symposium on the Function, Evolution
                    & Implementation of Consciousness
                           Edinburgh, Scotland
                            8-9 November 2017
                         http://designedmind.org

KEYNOTE SPEAKERS

* Daniel C. Dennett, Tufts University
* Michael Graziano, Princeton University

REPRESENTING OURSELVES

A pervasive belief, held by scientists and non-scientists alike, is that
consciousness is . Consciousness is simply identical to this formal property
and has no specifics that distinguish it from any other kind of information
processing that occurs in the biological world. This starting point leaves
consciousness in a rather passive role, serendipitous but otherwise useless.

This is a compelling intuition, but conspicuously neglects the central
functional role of consciousness in human behaviour. Human beings have a rich
set of behaviours centered around consciousness: they can describe the world
_from a vantage point_, report on how things _seem_ from that vantage point,
summarise their goals and plans, explain the world around them in terms of
possibilities for action, and justify those actions in terms of consciously
held beliefs, desires and feelings. Rather than arising as a mysterious
side-effect of being an information processing system, such
"consciousness-talk" - elaborate behaviour oriented around an ostensibly
private mental life - is a set of specific psychological mechanisms. These
mechanisms allow the exploitation of contingent, often social, information in
improvised behavior tailored to local conditions, an adaptive mode that
evolutionary psychologists John Tooby and Irven DeVore labelled the "cognitive
niche".

The aim of this symposium is to gather researchers who agree that _these
behaviours_ are the proper target, or explanandum, of a science of
consciousness. What seems (from the inside) to be a "private realm" is a
functional mechanism that exists in the public world: an internal behavioural
interface to the world, designed by evolution to enable new levels of
autonomy, self-monitoring and deliberative action. By representing not only
the world and its affordances for action, but also _ourselves_ as embodied
agents in the world. 

Mention:
Ryle, Dennett, Graziano, Meztinger, Ramanchandran, Hohwy, Merker, Arbib, Cosmides & Tooby

AFFILIATED WORKSHOP 

The symposium will be followed by Expecting Ourselves: Prediction, Action, and
the Embodied Mind, also in the Informatics Forum. Registration will be
separate for this event. See
http://www.x-spect.org/first-project-workshop.html.

ORGANISING COMMITTEE

PC Chair:            Roly Perera, University of Edinburgh
Publication Chairs:  Takuya Nikawa, Chiba University
                     Max Jones, University of Bristol
Publicity Chair:     AÃ¯da Elamrani Raoult, Institut Jean Nicod

PROGRAM COMMITTEE
