---
last_updated: September 24, 2015

summary: "Dennett's theory is a breakthrough, but falls short of an
account of phenomenal consciousness."

---

This web essay is an embryonic sketch of a theory of consciousness I
call the _Virtual Cartesian Theatre_. Some aspects of the idea are new;
others are not. In particular it builds substantially on the insights of
Daniel Dennett. A key difference, _vis à vis_ Dennett, is that the
Virtual Cartesian Theatre construes our non-materialist intuitions about
the mind as _central features of_ consciousness. These intuitions are
part of the phenomenon to be explained, rather than lingering confusion
about it.

The starting point of my account is Dennett's so-called "multiple
drafts" theory, as set out in his 1991 book
[Consciousness Explained](#dennett91a). Dennett's theory proposes that
we understand consciousness as an elaborate form of _behaviour_, driven
by narrative-building mechanisms in the brain. The "multiple" in
multiple drafts refers to the fact that there is no unique global
narrative defining the content of my consciousness, but rather distinct
strands of narrative competing for an opportunity to influence
behaviour. "Drafts" refers to the tentative nature of the content: the
official story of "what it was like to be me at time _t_" may be revised
over time in the light of further sensory input or processing.

Dennett's theory is profound, but many find it extremely unsatisfying.
The most common criticism is that by accounting only for function, or
behaviour, the scope of Dennett's theory necessarily excludes the key
phenomenon in need of explanation, namely the fact that _it is like
something_ to be me. At best Dennett's theory may explain the
"observable" aspects of consciousness, such as verbal reports, having
little if anything to say about our inner, private lives.

I have a lot of sympathy with this objection. It does indeed seem that
Dennett neglects the central mystery, namely how matter comes to have
subjective experience. Nevertheless, I believe it is possible to use the
core ingredients of Dennett's theory to explain this apparently mystery
purely in terms of function and behaviour.

To do so requires looking at Dennett's multiple drafts model in a new
way.

Dennett himself seems unable to make this move because of his
well-meaning but ultimately misguided wariness of Cartesian thinking. On
the subject of visual perception, for example, Dennett is unhesitating
in his rejection of a "coming together", of an internal image for the
mind's eye to inspect:

> “The eventual “products” of vision are such things as guided hand and
> finger motions, involuntary ducking, exclamations of surprise, triggering
> of ancient memories, sexual arousal, ... and none of these is imagistic
> in any sense...” [(BBS commentary on Pylyshyn)](#dennett02)

It is not hard to understand why Dennett is so opposed to the idea that
the job of vision is to produce an inner image. The idea of seeing as
the observation of an internal performance on a phenomenal stage -- the
dreaded "Cartesian theatre" -- is antithetical to the standard
materialist world view, and certainly invites a worry about infinite
regress. While the commitment to materialism is admirable, Dennett's
description of vision here is inaccurate:

As a taster of the key claim I will be making in this essay, start with
the following observation: contrary to Dennett, there are in fact many
imagistic aspects of visual behaviour. By this I mean that there are
many respects in which we _behave as though_ our visual percepts were
"presented" -- in such a way that our "mind's eye" is able to freely
roam over the percept itself. I emphasised the word "behave" here
because this aspect of visual perception in humans is not -- as some
philosophers might have it -- a "further fact" about perception that
exists beyond function or behaviour, but is part of our overt (and
presumably evolved) organismic function. The ability _not only_ to use
vision to "get by" in the world (identify mates, avoid predators) _but
also_ to behave deeply and systematically about the content of our
percepts is part of our phenotype. I believe that to understand this
properly is to understand phenomenal consciousness.

Examples that I will explore in
detail over the coming months include the way we report visual
illusions, entopic phenomena like
[floaters](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Floater), parallax, and
hallucinations induced by psychoactive drugs. These are all "behavioural
outputs" of vision that are profoundly imagistic.

The key point is that _vision_ and _visual phenomenology_ are not the
same thing. When the only _purpose_ of vision is to guide hand
movements, cause duckings, or elicit sexual arousal, these are indeed
the end products of vision. But when the requirements placed on our
visual capabilities are extended to include the production of verbal
reports,. It is because our vision these particular evolved functions
that

Does this mean that if we were somehow able to peek into the brain of a
seeing person, we would patterns of neural activation that resemble
images? No. Rather, it is to say that our self-narratives often have
content that is _functionally image-like_, and that the associated
behaviours are similarly imagistic. It is in this important, functional,
sense that there an inner presentation. Indeed the functional role of
the narrative in this situation is _precisely_ to serve as an inner
image of sorts: the narrative has as its content the phenomenonal image.
Of course the implementation technique may be quite clever, building the
representation on demand and only instantiating as much internal
structure as is required to meet the demands of the task at hand. But
these are mere implementation detail, and our "selves" live on the
outside of the abstraction.

Such a functional inner presentation is what I mean by the Virtual
Cartesian Theatre. Putting some flesh on the bones of this idea is the
purpose of this essay.

* * *

<a name="dennett91a"></a>Dennett, Daniel C. (1991).
[Consciousness Explained](). Little, Brown.

<a name="dennett02"></a>Dennett, Daniel C. (2002).
[Does your brain use the images in it, and if so, how?]() Commentary on
Pylyshyn, _Behavioral and Brain Sciences_ 25, no. 2, April 2002, pp.
189-190.
