---
last_updated: September 20, 2015

summary: "Dennett's proposed narrative-building mechanisms provide a
functional sense in which there is an inner presentation. As well being
able to perceive the world in a (pre-conscious) sense, we also are able
to behave systematically about the <i>content</i> of our percepts, for
example rejecting them as non-veridical, or describing them to others.
This higher-order behavioural capability is the essence of phenomenal
consciousness."

---

We have seen that Dennett's theory explains consciousness as an
unfolding narrative, of which there are at any point various "drafts"
some of which are woven into the official record, others of which are
discarded.

Contra Dennett, these narrative-building mechanisms very much provide a
sense – a functional, behavioural, indeed Dennettian sense – in which
there is a gate, albeit a fuzzy one, though which things "pass" in order
to "reach" consciousness. The gate simply partitions the content which
is currently part of the official account of how it was to be me, from
the content which been discarded, or has not yet been folded into the
narrative.

It may be true that the gate kind of disappears – is
[systematically elusive](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=YXN4AgAAQBAJ&pg=PA175&lpg=PA175&dq=systematic+elusiveness+of+i&source=bl&ots=wn5t5rARGJ&sig=xupjnl751KcfK9UzrQnznwLs1qI&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0CDQQ6AEwA2oVChMIw5b6koWYxwIVA4_bCh2W7Ap8#v=onepage&q=systematic%20elusiveness%20of%20i&f=false),
one might say, to echo Ryle's evocative description of the self – as you
get closer to the mechanisms that realise it. One will notice inputs
that get processed but for some reason never have any effect on
behaviour, or discriminations which get made by some part of the brain
but which are vetoed or revised by some other process, and so on. And
certainly there are no absolute and permanent facts as to whether some
micro-discrimination lies before or beyond the gate, since "what I was
conscious of at t" is a dispositional property of the self-narrative
that is itself time-indexed and subject to occasional revision in the
light of additional input. Indeed, the (functional) location of the gate
– what we were conscious of – is often only fixed on demand, when a
behavioural probe of some kind is instigated.

At an important level of description, then -- roughly speaking, the
level at which folk-psychological attributions are useful -- there is
something which behaviourally amounts to a consciousness gateway. The
Multiple Drafts model explains how one can have something like an inner
presentation without anything quite so baroque as a literal movie
theatre in the brain. Our self-narrative is a dynamically unfolding, and
occasionally retroactively revised, story whose _content_ comprises our
phenomenal lives. The current version of the transcript can at any point
in time be consulted by (in less introspective language: functionally
implicated in) other brain processes involved in the production of
behaviour, such as the creation of verbal reports. It takes a cleverly
crafted behavioural probe to spot the minor inconsistencies in the
"official" narrative over time, exposing the revisionary and on-the-fly
editorial nature of the narrative-building mechanism; but these minor
inconsistencies do not diminish its functional role as an inner
presentation.

So if you are a materialist who takes the denial of any kind of
Cartesian Theatre -- even a biologically plausible one -- as a given, I
ask that you suspend your anti-Cartesian intuitions and grant the case
for the functional gateway for the time being. The remaining task is to
tackle the intuition that such a gateway would be somehow redundant, to
make the case that such a mind design actually does something important
behaviourally.

The functionalist notion of representation we have considered should
make it clear that just because the abstraction which is our visual
phenomenology is realised by a hugely complex, multi-layered,
many-faceted mechanism, no doubt strewn with evolutionary ad-hocery and
optimisations, we cannot infer that the realised thing is not something
approximating a single, integrated, coherent whole. Consciousness is a
plenum! Neuroscientist and philosopher Kathleen Akins outlines Dennett's
empirical bet on the nature of human vision (Akins, 2002):

> [Dennett imagines that] What the neurosciences will show is that our
> army of visual specialists has not been co-opted into the production of
> static 'master' representations, the kind of 'complete', 'detailed',
> 'unified' images of the visual scene that our first-person experience
> makes plausible. Rather, we, as a species, have found a way to represent
> a stable, coherent world of objects and properties and yet our visual
> system has nonetheless retained its army of specialists. (p. 222)

On the contrary, producing a static 'master' representation of the
world, a Virtual Cartesian Theatre with ourselves at the narrative
centre, is exactly what the brain does; it just does it in quite a
clever way, storing most of the raw data in the world itself. The
interpretative process includes an on-demand loading mechanism (call it
our “attentional faculty”, if you will) which brings just as much of
that raw data online as is required to meet the behavioural task at
hand. This claim is underwritten by a Dennettian distinction: that
between a unified representation and a representation of a unified
thing. Dennett himself asks ([1991a](#dennett91a), p. 360)

> "why should your brain bother importing all those Marilyns in the
> first place? Why not just let the world store them, at no cost,
> until they're needed?

This indeed is exactly how the brain builds a static representation that
in the abstract includes all the Marilyns.
