---
last_updated: October 30, 2015

summary: "Dennett's Multiple Drafts theory is primarily a negative
account, focusing on what consciousness could not possibly be. To
understand consciousness properly, we need to recast Dennett's theory as
a positive account. The empirical phenomena Dennett presents as evidence
against a coming together are reinterpreted as a glimpse of the clever
tricks used to implement a coming together."

---

{% include linkrefs.html %}

According to [Pessoa et al](#pessoa98),

> Everybody agrees that this idea [the Cartesian Theatre] is totally wrong.

Methodological consensus is important in science, providing a heuristic
for distinguishing "extraordinary" from ordinary claims, and ensuring
that extraordinary claims are supported by extraordinary evidence.
Unfortunately, a widely-held materialist assumption -- that the
Cartesian Theatre is wrong not just in a literal sense but in every
sense -- is hindering progress towards a scientific understanding of
consciousness. This is ultimately the problem with
[_Consciousness Explained_](#dennett91a), forcing Dennett to disregard
any functional role for an inner presentation. Yet this reinterpretation
of the Cartesian intuition is precisely the trick required to complete
Dennett's otherwise compelling functionalist story and produce a full
account of the "core features" of phenomenal consciousness, such as
qualia and introspection.

I tend to see the materialist's blanket rejection of the Cartesian
Theatre as an (understandable) overreaction to substance dualism.
Substance dualism -- the belief that the mental constitutes a realm
separate from, but causally linked to, the physical -- is (to most
materialists) "obviously" incompatible with the modern scientific image,
and so anything Cartesian in flavour gets lumped into the same bag of
bad ideas. Certainly, Dennett is absolutely clear that his rejection of
Cartesian thinking is broad enough to include even a functional notion
of the Theater:

> You may well suspect that under the cover of antidualism...I have
> spirited away (quite literally) something Descartes was actually right
> about: There is a functional place of some sort where the items of
> phenomenology are...projected.
> ([Dennett, 1991](#dennett91a), p. 127)

But beyond the unsavoury echo of substance dualism, exactly why a
functional version of the Theatre should be problematic is less clear.
The familiar spectre of infinite regress is perhaps one worry. If
explaining conscious agency requires positing an "inner" conscious
agent, and so on _ad infinitum_, then clearly we have a problem. But as
long as any posited inner agent is strictly simpler than the agent which
contains it, infinite regress is avoided. Indeed Dennett's own theories,
and related positions such as Lycan's "homuncular functionalism"
([Lycan, 1987](#lycan87)), propose exactly such a decomposition of the
self into strictly smaller proto-selves.

Once the Cartesian image is rejected on _a priori_ grounds, Dennett is
painted into a corner. No possible functional role for an inner
presentation can be accommodated. The naïve version of Cartesian
materialism envisages a _consciousness gateway_, a special location in
the brain through which a perception or other judgement must "pass" --
or perhaps a special status that it must achieve -- in order to become
conscious. Any functional counterpart of this idea must also be
rejected, lest the spectre of the inner presentation be reintroduced.

For example Dennett claims that perceptual and similar judgements made
by the brain have only a "non-imagistic" role to play, allowing us avoid
predation, or recognise food, or avoid projectiles hurled towards us; if
they additionally gave rise to some kind of inner presentation, that
would somehow be _functionally redundant_. Any such presentation would
be a mysterious "further fact" about consciousness, related to our
behaviour, presumably, but independent of it at least in the sense that
one could equally well exhibit the aforementioned behaviour without the
inner presentation.

Dennett's project now becomes negative, rather than positive. Much of
_Consciousness Explained_ is devoted to purging the vestiges of the
Cartesian Theatre from our fledgling scientific picture of the mind. He
enlists a number of important empirical findings from consciousness
research in support of this project. I consider three of these in detail
in the next section:
[spatio-temporal ambiguity](multiple-drafts-dennett-spatio-temporal.html);
the
[susceptibility to future revision](multiple-drafts-dennett-non-monotonic.html)
of narrative content; and that the brain prefers
[finding out to filling in](multiple-drafts-dennett-finding-out.html).
However, although these phenomena do indeed reveal profound things about
consciousness, none of them counts as evidence against an "inner
presentation", as Dennett's materialist commitments lead him to suggest.
On the contrary, they reveal the clever implementation tricks the brain
uses to _implement_ an inner presentation, using nothing but pure
mechanism.

My [conclusion](multiple-drafts-functional-gateway.html) is that we
should invert Dennett's interpretation of his own theory. Multiple
Drafts is not a rejection of a "consciousness gateway" or inner
presentation, but rather the beginnings of a story about how such a
thing _might actually work_. Contra the materialist's intuition, the
notion of inner presentation is not a functionally redundant vestige of
poor Cartesian thinking, but a central functional component of human
perceptual behaviour.

- - -

<a name="dennett91a"></a>Dennett, Daniel C. (1991).
[Consciousness Explained](). Little, Brown.

<a name="dennett92"></a>Dennett, D. and Kinsbourne, M. (1992).
[Time and the Observer: the Where and When of Consciousness in the Brain]().
_Behavioral and Brain Sciences 15_.

<a name="lycan87"></a>Lycan, W. (1987). [Consciousness.]() Bradford
Books/MIT Press.

<a name="pessoa98"></a>Pessoa, L., Thompson, E. and Noë, A. (1998).
[Finding out about filling in: a guide to perceptual completion for visual science and the philosophy of perception.]()
_Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21_.
