---
last_updated: October 30, 2015

summary: "TODO"

---

{% include linkrefs.html %}

If [temporal smearing](multiple-drafts-dennett-spatio-temporal) doesn't
threaten to undermine the Cartesian Theatre, what of this other
putatively odd characteristic of conscious events, their susceptibility
to future revision in the light of further input? Dennett's empirical
case is mainly based on the well-known colour phi experiment, first
conducted in response to a question posed by Nelson Goodman (1978). Phi
effects are the phenomena of apparent motion, familiar to us as the
basis for film and television. A simple example of the phi effect is the
apparent motion observed when a small spot of coloured light is flashed
on a screen in one position, and then flashed again at a position
slightly to one side, and so on in rapid succession. If the time
interval is fairly small, then rather than seeing a number of successive
flashes, you see the smooth movement of a single spot of light.
Goodman's question, which prompted the colour phi variant, was: what
happens if the light changes colour half-way through, say from green to
blue?

The interesting answer is that the spot seems to change colour
mid-trajectory, at a spatial location roughly halfway between the last
green spot and the first blue spot (Kolers and von Grünau, 1976). What
is initially surprising here is of course the fact that the stimulus
that causes you to perceive the switch to blue has not yet occurred at
the point in time at which – according to your subsequent verbal reports
– you experienced the switch to blue! Dennett does an excellent job of
demystifying this apparent oddity (see for example Dennett, 1991a, 1992
and 1995), by distinguishing the temporal content of a representation
from the temporal properties of the representation itself. His
explanation is that a judgement made by the brain can be antedated:
given a earlier “postmark” which retroactively fits it into an unfolding
account of what happened in such a way that the story being told is
consistent with the total stimulus received thus far. Since, by
Dennett's reckoning, this unfolding narrative is constitutive of the
content of our consciousness, the effect observed through behavioural
studies is that I appear to become conscious of the colour switch before
the colour switch actually occurs. There is nothing paradoxical about
this; “no sounds appear to issue from heads before lips move, nor do
hands move before the brain events that purportedly cause them” (Dennett
and Kinsbourne, 1992). Only in the subject's reported stream of
consciousness do we find a putative anomaly, and Dennett's account of
the narrative-building process explains these data quite comfortably.

Let me introduce some short-hand (well, shorter-hand) for this
susceptibility-to-future-revision property: non-monotonicity. (A
monotonic semantics is one which does not allow for additional data to
alter the interpretation made of the input thus far.) Consciousness then
is non-monotonic in that there can be “backward kinks” in the
relationship between objective time and subjective time as reported.
Dennett's account becomes problematic when he tries to use the
non-monotonicity of consciousness with respect to objective properties
of the world to support his argument against the Cartesian Theatre. The
line roughly runs: since the brain can change its mind about what seemed
to happen, there is simply no fact of the matter about what seemed to
happen. “There is no finish line”, as Dennett puts it (1995).
Unfortunately although non-monotonicity successfully dispenses with the
notion of a canonical or objective finish line which is the ultimate
authority on our conscious experience, it does not in any way preclude
the possibility of something which behaviourally amounts to an
“official” finish line, just one that is subject to occasional revision.
Indeed, and perhaps ironically, Dennett's Multiple Drafts Model in
general, and his account of colour phi in particular, amount to a theory
of how just such a behavioural finish line might actually come about. It
is all very well to talk of the efforts the brain goes to to pre-date
various judgements in the colour phi experiments, but this immediately
raises the question of why the brain even bothers to do this antedating.
The natural explanation is that it does so in order to maximise the
local integrity of the narrative precisely so that there is, at any
point in time, a single official picture of “how it was to be me” at
some earlier time. These kinds of editing efforts by the brain should
therefore be interpreted as constructors of a virtual finish line, a
functional, behavioural one, rather than a physical one. So where
Dennett-the-anti-Cartesian wants to conclude, from non-monotonicity,
that there is no fact of the matter as to how it was to be me (at t),
Dennett-the-functionalist's reply would be to say that at any subsequent
time t', there are indeed facts of the matter as to how it was to be me
at t, and those facts are solely determined by the t-related content of
the narrative at t'; it just so happens that at some other subsequent
time t'', there may be a different facts of the matter about how it was
to be me at t.

This susceptibility to revision is hardly unique to mental events, after
all. In formal systems, monotonicity is a often a desirable
characteristic, but in the real world – the world of practising
scientists as well as the world of everyday folk-theorising –
non-monotonicity is common. Systems which have some dynamical component,
such as eco-systems, economies, materials under stress, and human brains
are often interpreted non-monotonically because they often have a high
degree of sensitivity to initial conditions which means it is hard to
predict how the system will evolve. “What happened at time t” in such
systems is not necessarily a fixed fact but one which is subject to
change should the subsequent evolution of the system suggest
reinterpretation of an earlier model of its history.

As we did with the spatiotemporal ambiguity case, let's follow Dennett's
line of reasoning in a less contentious context, as a kind of intuition
counter-pump. Consider speciation events in an ecological system. Now,
the precise definition of species is an elusive one in biology but
mainly for reasons which need not concern us here; what do concern us
here are the epistemic limits that prevent us from observing a
speciation event as it occurs. If two populations within a single
species become reproductively isolated for some reason (say geographical
separation), we cannot be certain that we have observed a new species in
the making, not just because a species is composed of multiple
individuals and therefore its creation is spatio-temporally distributed,
but because a speciation event is only a speciation event because of
some property of how the system subsequently evolves. If the two
populations subsequently merge and continue interbreeding as before then
we will not be inclined to say that we saw a speciation event take place
followed immediately by an unspeciation event, but simply that no such
event took place in the first place. On the other hand if we study the
populations for some time and eventually they lose reproductive
affinity, or they reproduce but produce sterile offspring, or some other
criterion is met which is considered sufficient for the existence of a
separate species, then we could quite reasonably go back and
retrospectively identify the original reproductive isolation as the
beginning of a temporally extended speciation event.

If Dennett pursued his own line of reasoning in this example, he would
be forced to conclude from the absence of objective, “canonical” facts
about whether speciation events have occurred, to the absence of
speciation events altogether. This is a fairly straightforward reductio
ad absurdum of the argument from non-monotonicity against the Virtual
Cartesian Theatre, but remember that one of our goals here was to
understand what Dennett's arguments succeed at too. As with
spatiotemporal ambiguity, non-monotonicity shows that conscious events
simply cannot evolve in lock-step with brain events, at least not
without events being able to travel backwards in time or other such
tricks. This is perhaps the most important conclusion we should draw
from the “multiple drafts” story: that there is no “final” narrative
which is canonical – that represents the actual stream of consciousness
of the subject. To put it another way, consciousness cannot at the level
of micro-structure be the literal “leading edge of perceptual memory”
(Lockwood, 1993) but must be a just-after-the-fact interpretation of
what has happened thus far, an interpretation that is not immune to
revision in the light of further evidence.

Once again then Dennett's case is really nothing more than a convincing
argument against psychophysical identity – or more generally against the
thesis that there is neural structure in the brain which is in direct
topographical correspondence with the structure of experience (e.g.
Teller and Pugh, 1983). Such correspondence, if it exists, must be more
topological or functional than topographical or spatial. This is an
important lesson to come away with, given just how deep the “direct
correspondence” intuition runs among scientists (see Chalmers, 1998, for
a comprehensive list of some of “neural correlate” stories which have
been told so far), but ipso facto has no relevance to the
heterophenomenological case for the Virtual Cartesian Theatre.
