---
last_updated: August 24, 2015

summary: "Phenomenal consciousness has a clear functional role: to allow
an agent to make decisions, justify actions and communicate beliefs in
which perceptual content serves as data."

---

The lingering materialist suspicion is that the kinds of judgements we
have been discussing – filling in judgements, inferences about temporal
ordering, and so forth – do not really amount to a presentation, a
performance on some kind of phenomenal stage. Who is the imagined
audience, after all? Even if you buy the idea that there is a coming
together – a functional, rather than physical one – then we might still
legitimately ask, "isn't it enough just for there to be a coming
together – why do we also need an audience _for whom_ things come
together?"

This is a subtle question and one whose answer again runs strongly
against the standard materialist position. All the brain needs to do is
generate behaviour; that much of the standard position is true. The
further assumption (which I think is mistaken) is that a Cartesian
gateway to consciousness, however materialistically grounded, would have
nothing to contribute to behaviour, and therefore parsimony alone should
be enough good enough grounds to discard it. Moreover, since the
imagined Cartesian gateway doesn't do anything:

> thinking in its terms is not an innocuous shortcut; it is a bad habit
> ([Dennett and Kinsbourne, 1992]()).

My simple reply (only a loose sketch at this stage, to be fleshed out
over the coming months) is fully grounded in materalism and is based on
an empirical claim about how we behave. I suggest that the reason it
makes sense to talk of a Virtual Cartesian Theatre is precisely that we
_behave like disembodied agents_ in control of a physical body, able to
cleanly separate how things seem (how they are presented to "us") from
how we believe them to be, so that we can make good choices about what
perceptual data to trust and what not to trust. Things _come together
for us_ -- as opposed to merely coming together -- because our
high-level, goal-oriented agency is behaviourally separated, for good
evolutionary reasons, from our low-level perceptual capacities, and
because much of our high-level, goal-oriented behaviour is _about the
content_ of our low-level perceptual discriminations.

The heterophenomenology that Dennett and others have tried to explain
away as illusory, or ill-conceived, or the legacy of poor Cartesian
theorising, are real patterns in need of explanation, no different in
principle from the real patterns which we explain using beliefs and
desires. This is why the Virtual Cartesian Theatre is not redundant, but
an important theoretical posit on par with belief/desire talk. It allows
us to behave quite differently from animals: we can be appreciators, as
well as victims, of optical illusions, for example. The Cartesian
“re-presentation” which might offend our materialist sensibilities is
nothing other than our ability to behave deeply and systematically with
respect to low-level or pre-cognitive perceptual content. There is
nothing mystical, immaterial or redundant about this, nor does it run
counter to evolutionary theory. There is a good case therefore for the
idea that it is our materialist intuitions that are at fault.
