---
layout: default
title: Mind Design
---

# Big questions

## Take-home messages

These are the main claims I will be expanding on the next few years:

* Consciousness is _designed functionality_, like a heart is a designed
  to work as a pump. The "designer" here is natural selection, not an
  intelligent designer. The word "designed" emphasises that
  consciousness serves a _function_, rather than being a spurious
  side-effect of having a certain kind of brain, or exhibiting a certain
  kind of behaviour. To put it another way, consciousness _is_ a certain
  kind of behaviour.
* One of the key functions of consciousness is to allow an evolved agent
  to treat its own _perceptual judgements_ -- judgements which are not
  themselves conscious -- as data. For example while any perceptual
  agent can be a victim of a perceptual illusion, only a _conscious_
  agent can be an _appreciator_ of such things. From an evolutionary
  point of view it is sometimes useful to be able to distinguish between
  _the way the world seems_ and the way we believe the world to be.
* This represention of the way the world seems does not need to take the
  form of an explicit internal image (cf. "finding out vs. filling in"
  debate). But _it is nevertheless a representation of the way the world
  seems_. It is simply a representation which is built on an as-needed
  basis: when some behaviour about "the way the world seems" is needed,
  the brain generates a judgement about the way the world seems -
  perhaps by initiating an action, such as a visual saccade, to acquire
  the needed information, or perhaps by retroactively constructing it by
  analysing a lingering trace of some earlier perceptual process.
  Functionally-speaking, this is equivalently to "eagerly" computing the
  represention up front, but is much more computationally tractable.
  This is essentially Dennett's "multiple drafts" theory of consciousness.

## Overall structure

* _Situate_ my story broadly in the materialist, Dennettian framework
* _Summarise_ my overall claim. Restrict this by wordcount, e.g. 500 or 1000 words.

# Themes

## Consciousness as _functionality_ (observable behavior)

While it seems to us that consciousness is an inherently _private_
affair, I believe this _notion_ of an inner, private life is
fundamentally _public_. Being a conscious agent is _functionality_ that
I implement. Natural selection "designed" us to be conscious agents by
selecting for that observable behaviour. Consciousness is a designed
feature in exactly the sense that a heart is designed to pump blood
around the body.

## Burden tennis

David Chalmers does an excellent job of spelling out the intuition that
any scientific account of consciousness will _necessarily_ fall short of
a full explanation. (This is what Joseph Levine famously called the
"explanatory gap".) According to Chalmers, the best a scientific account
can do is provide an explanation of the physical mechanisms that seem to
_accompany_ consciousness -- the neural goings-on that correlate with
conscious phenomena. For example [cite Dehaene] recent experiments have
revealed differences in brain activity when we report a conscious
percept versus when the same stimulus is presented to us in such a way
that we are not conscious of it. Chalmer's intuition -- and it is such a
compelling one that I think many share it -- is that _however much_ we
discover about the difference in brain activity between conscious states
and non-conscious ones, we make _no progress at all_ on understanding
_why_ the conscious states actually involve consciousness. It seems that
all the things conscious matter does can be done perfectly well without
consciousness.

Teed Rockwell described this stand-off between Dennett and Chalmers as
"burden tennis". Each believes the burden of proof lies with the other.
Dennett believes Chalmers has failed to show that there are any
phenomena that remain to be accounted for, once all the behaviour is
accounted for. Chalmers argues that Dennett must _either_ admit that the
materialist story inherently falls short of a full explanation, _or_ why
we have such a strong intuition that this is the case.

Although the account of consciousness I want to develop here builds on
Dennett's, I believe that in this particular respect Chalmers is right:
the burden of proof does indeed lie with the _materialist_ to explain
the "anti-materialist intuition". This is a challenge I want to tackle
head-on.

## The Virtual Cartesian Theatre



# Goals
