---
layout: default
title: Article notes
---

# Themes

## Burden tennis

David Chalmers does an excellent job of spelling out the intuition that
any scientific account of consciousness will _necessarily_ fall short of
a full explanation. (This is what Joseph Levine famously called the
"explanatory gap".) According to Chalmers, the best a scientific account
can do is provide an explanation of the physical mechanisms that seem to
_accompany_ consciousness -- the neural goings-on that correlate with
conscious phenomena. For example [cite Dehaene] recent experiments have
revealed differences in brain activity when we report a conscious
percept versus when the same stimulus is presented to us in such a way
that we are not conscious of it. Chalmer's intuition -- and it is such a
compelling one that I think many share it -- is that _however much_ we
discover about the difference in brain activity between conscious states
and non-conscious ones, we make _no progress at all_ on understanding
_why_ the conscious states actually involve consciousness. It seems that
all the things conscious matter does can be done perfectly well without
consciousness.

Teed Rockwell described this stand-off between Dennett and Chalmers as
"burden tennis". Each believes the burden of proof lies with the other.
Dennett believes Chalmers has failed to show that there are any
phenomena that remain to be accounted for, once all the behaviour is
accounted for. Chalmers argues that Dennett must _either_ admit that the
materialist story inherently falls short of a full explanation, _or_ why
we have such a strong intuition that this is the case.

Although the account of consciousness I want to develop here builds on
Dennett's, I believe that in this particular respect Chalmers is right:
the burden of proof does indeed lie with the _materialist_ to explain
the "anti-materialist intuition". This is a challenge I want to tackle
head-on.

## The Easy Problem is Extremely Hard, and There is no Hard Problem
