---
layout: default
title: Multiple Drafts and the Cartesian Theatre
---

Materialist skepticism about the Cartesian Theatre is deeply entrenched.
According to [Pessoa et al](#pessoa98), for example,

> Everybody agrees that this idea [the Cartesian Theatre] is totally wrong.

It seems we materialists have been agreeing that anything that smacks of
Cartesianism is wrong for so long that we no longer seem to need much of
a justification for doing so. Methodologically, this entrenched dogma
makes it difficult to discuss a cognitive architecture that even has the
_flavour_ of Cartesian dualism without running this risk of its being
miscontrued as a non-materialist proposal.

The problem with the Cartesian Theatre as traditionally construed is not
simply the threat of an infinite series of ever-more-nested homunculi.
As long as any posited inner sub-agent is strictly simpler than the
agent which contains it -- as long as it is a _proper_ sub-agent, as a
mathematician might say -- such a regress can eventually terminate.
Indeed, Dennett's theories, and similar positions such as Lycan's
"homuncular functionalism" ([Lycan, 1987]()), propose exactly such a
decomposition of the self into a number of strictly smaller
proto-selves. Instead, the problem with the Cartesian Theatre, at least
for Dennett, seems to be with the very idea of some kind of "gateway"
through which a perception, or a judgement, must "pass" in order for it
to become conscious. But aside from the obviously Cartesian overtones,
exactly why this is problematic is less clear. The thought is perhaps
that in a fully materialistic theory, a "consciousness gateway" is
redundant at best.

What I shall now attempt to argue is that despite Dennett's best
intentions, his Multiple Drafts Model of consciousness amounts to just
such a theory of a functional gateway. I will then attempt to challenge
the materialist intuition that such a gateway would be somehow
redundant. In particular I will argue that such a functional gateway
plays an essential role in generating certain kinds of behaviour that
are canonical examples of conscious behaviour.

So let's start with the Multiple Drafts Model. The very name of
Dennett's theory invites the question: multiple drafts of what? If there
is indeed an unfolding narrative, at any point in time in the form of
multiple “drafts” constantly being either woven into the “official”
record, or discarded, then that very much provides a sense – a
functional, behavioural, Dennettian sense – in which there is a gate,
albeit a fuzzy one, though which things “pass” in order to “reach”
consciousness. The gate simply partitions the content which is currently
part of the official account of how it was to be me, from the content
which been discarded, or has not yet been folded into the narrative. It
may be true that the gate kind of disappears – is systematically
elusive, one might say, to echo Ryle – as you get closer, and start to
notice inputs that get processed but for some reason never have any
effect on behaviour, or discriminations which get made by some part of
the brain but which are vetoed or revised by some other process, and so
on. And certainly there are no absolute and permanent facts as to
whether some micro-discrimination lies before or beyond the gate, since
“what I was conscious of at t” is a dispositional property of the
self-narrative that is itself time-indexed and subject to occasional
revision in the light of additional input. Indeed, the (functional)
location of the gate – what we were conscious of – is often only fixed
on demand, when a behavioural probe of some kind is instigated.

But as we have seen, none of these properties – neither local
indeterminacy, nor non-monotonicity, nor dependence on clever
implementation techniques – is unique to conscious phenomena, and
moreover, none of them has any bearing on the fact that at some level of
description, there is something which behaviourally amounts to a
consciousness gateway. The Multiple Drafts Model is thus not a theory of
something which is “rather like a narrative” (Dennett and Kinsbourne,
1992); it is a proposal, and an empirically well supported one at that,
for one possible realisation of something which is a narrative,
functionally speaking: a dynamically unfolding story whose transcript to
date can at any point in time be consulted by (in less introspective
language: functionally implicated in) other brain processes involved in
the production of behaviour, such as the creation of verbal reports. It
takes a cleverly crafted behavioural probe to spot the minor
inconsistencies in the “official” narrative over time, exposing the
revisionary and on-the-fly editorial nature of the narrative-building
mechanism; but these minor inconsistencies do not make it fundamentally
any less of a narrative.

So if you are a materialist who takes the denial of any kind of
Cartesian Theatre -- even a biologically plausible one -- as a given, I
ask that you suspend your anti-Cartesian intuitions and grant the case
for the functional gateway for the time being. The remaining task is to
tackle the intuition that such a gateway would be somehow redundant.

## What is consciousness _for_?

The lingering materialist suspicion is that the kinds of judgements we
have been discussing – filling in judgements, inferences about temporal
ordering, and so forth – do not really amount to a presentation, a
performance on some kind of phenomenal stage. Who is the imagined
audience, after all? Even if I have made a convincing case that there is
a coming together – a functional, rather than physical one – then we
might still legitimately ask, “isn't it enough just for there to be a
coming together – why do we also need an audience for whom things come
together?”

This is a subtle question and one whose answer again runs strongly
against the standard materialist position. All the brain needs to do is
generate behaviour; that much of the standard position is true. The
further assumption (which I think is mistaken) is that a Cartesian
gateway to consciousness, however materialistically grounded, would have
nothing to contribute to behaviour, and therefore parsimony alone should
be enough good enough grounds to discard it. Moreover, since the
imagined Cartesian gateway doesn't do anything, “thinking in its terms
is not an innocuous shortcut; it is a bad habit” (Dennett and
Kinsbourne, 1992).

My simple reply (only a loose sketch at this stage, to be fleshed out
over the coming months) is fully grounded in materalism and is based on
an empirical claim about how we behave. I suggest that the reason it
makes sense to talk of a Virtual Cartesian Theatre is precisely that we
_behave like disembodied agents_ in control of a physical body, able to
cleanly separate how things seem (how they are presented to "us") from
how we believe them to be, so that we can make good choices about what
perceptual data to trust and what not to trust. Things _come together
for us_ -- as opposed to merely coming together -- because our
high-level, goal-oriented agency is behaviourally separated, for good
evolutionary reasons, from our low-level perceptual capacities, and
because much of our high-level, goal-oriented behaviour is _about the
content_ of our low-level perceptual discriminations.

The heterophenomenology that Dennett and others have tried to explain
away as illusory, or ill-conceived, or the legacy of poor Cartesian
theorising, are real patterns in need of explanation, no different in
principle from the real patterns which we explain using beliefs and
desires. This is why the Virtual Cartesian Theatre is not redundant, but
an important theoretical posit on par with belief/desire talk. It allows
us to behave quite differently from animals: we can be appreciators, as
well as victims, of optical illusions, for example. The Cartesian
“re-presentation” which might offend our materialist sensibilities is
nothing other than our ability to behave deeply and systematically with
respect to low-level or pre-cognitive perceptual content. There is
nothing mystical, immaterial or redundant about this, nor does it run
counter to evolutionary theory. There is a good case therefore for the
idea that it is our materialist intuitions that are at fault.

The functionalist notion of representation we have considered should
make it clear that just because the abstraction which is our visual
phenomenology is realised by a hugely complex, multi-layered,
many-faceted mechanism, no doubt strewn with evolutionary ad-hocery and
optimisations, we cannot infer that the realised thing is not something
approximating a single, integrated, coherent whole. Consciousness is a
plenum! Neuroscientist and philosopher Kathleen Akins outlines Dennett's
empirical bet on the nature of human vision (Akins, 2002):
“[Dennett imagines that] What the neurosciences will show is that our
army of visual specialists has not been co-opted into the production of
static 'master' representations, the kind of 'complete', 'detailed',
'unified' images of the visual scene that our first-person experience
makes plausible. Rather, we, as a species, have found a way to represent
a stable, coherent world of objects and properties and yet our visual
system has nonetheless retained its army of specialists.” (p. 222)

On the contrary, producing a static 'master' representation of the
world, a Virtual Cartesian Theatre with ourselves at the narrative
centre, is exactly what the brain does; it just does it in quite a
clever way, storing most of the raw data in the world itself. The
interpretative process includes an on-demand loading mechanism (call it
our “attentional faculty”, if you will) which brings just as much of
that raw data online as is required to meet the behavioural task at
hand. This claim is underwritten by a Dennettian distinction: that
between a unified representation and a representation of a unified
thing. Dennett himself asks, “why should your brain bother importing all
those Marilyns in the first place? Why not just let the world store
them, at no cost, until they're needed?” (1991a, p. 360). This indeed is
exactly how the brain builds a static representation that in the
abstract includes all the Marilyns.

- - -

<a name="lycan87"></a>Lycan, W. [Consciousness.]() Bradford Books/MIT
Press, 1987.

<a name="pessoa98"></a>Pessoa, L., Thompson, E. and Noë, A.
[Finding out about filling in: a guide to perceptual completion for visual science and the philosophy of perception.]()
_Behavioral and Brain Sciences_, no. 21, 1998.
